---
layout: code-post
title: The Command Line Interpreter (CLI)
description: An introduction to using the terminal and bash
tags: [demo]
---



The goal of this lecture is to demystify the command line a bit by giving examples of
how to use it to navigate the file tree and edit files.

Why is this a worthwhile endeavor? The main reason is that writing a graphical user
interface (GUI) for a program is expensive, and writing a good GUI even moreso. As one
uses more and more software and wants to write more and more software, having at least
some facility with the command line becomes necessary.

## Terminals and shells

The terminal -- technically a _terminal emulator_ ([details](http://www.linusakesson.net/programming/tty/))-- is the graphical program that allows you to input commands to a computer program as text. Mac OS has its
default terminal, the Ubuntu flavor of linux might have the Gnome Terminal, and Windows has
the Windows Terminal. You are not locked into the default terminal, there are many you can
use with a search of `best terminals ubuntu 2021` or similar in your preferred search engine.

A _shell_ is the actual command line interpreter that is used that allows for the interaction between you
and the computer. The most common shell in the unix world is `bash`, which
stands for Bourne Again Shell and was built to replace the the Bourne Shell `sh`. You might also hear of `zsh`
or even `fish` which are other shells. For the most part, if you open a shell on a linux machine or mac,
you will be provided with `bash` as your default shell. In the Windows world there is PowerShell,
but we'll be putting that aside for this talk. Note: since at least Windows 10, Windows has a built in linux 
subsystem that can be enabled, so even Windows users can use `bash` for some things.

According to the [2020 Stack Overflow Developer survey](https://insights.stackoverflow.com/survey/2020#development-environments-and-toolss) about 54% of developers use Mac OS or a Linux
system, so Windows is by no means dead, but it is slightly less common.

### Basic commands

#### Where are we?

If I open up the terminal, the first thing to do is orient ourselves. You'll be
dropped into your home directory. To print the path to your working directory, i.e., your location 
in the file system, you use the `pwd` command.

To list the files in this directory you can use `ls`. To see more information about
when files were created and how large they are, you might use `ls -lh`, where
the dash allows us to add options to the original command. For most commands you
can learn more about the options by appending the `--help` option, or read the
manual page by typing `man CMD`. To see hidden files and directories (those that start with `.`)
you need to use the `-a` flag. You can also look just for files that end with an extension
for example by using the _wildcard_ `*`. For example, `ls ./*.py` will only list files
that end with `.py` that live in the current directory. The single dot `.` in
`./` refers to the current directory.

To _print working directory_ we used the `pwd` command, what about if we want
to _change directory_? Then we use `cd PATH_TO_DIRECTORY`. For example, I'll
write `cd Code` to change to the directory named `Code` that is under the
current working directory. If you get lost, you can go home again with `cd` and nothing trailing it.
To go up from the current directory, you can use `cd ..` or to go up to directories
`cd ../..`. To go to the _root_ directory of `/` you can type `cd /`. This also allows
you to type universal paths not just relative to your current directory. So instead of
`cd Code`, if you are somewhere else in the file systems, you could write `cd /home/username/Code`.
Another trick is that the tilde means relative to your home directory `cd ~/Code` would
also work. You should also be table to hit TAB to autocomplete and search.

One benefit of using the command line is that it can be MUCH FASTER
to navigate the file tree using `cd` just because typing is faster than moving a mouse
and clicking. It does not take long to learn where most things you need to use are in the
file system, so navigation is quick no matter where you are.

#### What can I do with these files?

In a unix-like system, _everthing is a file_ (roughly), even directories. So it's important
to be able to see things about them. While this is a deep statement about the design philosphy of unix-like
systems that I won't (can't?) unpack, let's start examining these files. 
Basic stats can be provided by `ls -lh` as we saw above. 

To see how many lines a file contains, we can use `wc -l` (word count, with the `-l` flag). To see
the first five lines of a file we can use `head -n 5` and to see the ending five lines of a file you can 
use `tail -n 5`. (Advanced note: if an application is writing to a log file, you can use `tail -f`
to see the log change in real time as the application writes out to it.)

To see the entire file, you can use `cat` (derived from concatenate). By default, `cat` prints
to standard out (the terminal we are looking at), but we can redirect to a new file
with `cat FILE > new.txt` or append to an existing file with `cat FILE >> new.txt`. You can of
course copy a file via `cp FILE new.txt` as well. Or move it entirely with `mv FILE new.txt`.

How do we get rid of that new file? `rm new.txt`. Will remove it. To remove a directory,
you can `rm -r DIRECTORY` or you might have the command `rmdir DIRECTORY` which will probably
complain if the directory is not empty. CAUTION: deletes are permanent unless your files
are backed up somewhere, like, say you are in a git directory and you can `git checkout FILE`.
Sometimes the system will complain about deleting certain files, asking for 
explicit permission to do so. In particular, this happens
if you try to `rm -r GITHUB_REPO` for some directory that is a github repo. To force delete,
you would use the `-f` flag, so you might `rm -rf GITHUB_REPO`. BE VERY CAREFUL WHEN DOING THIS.
For example, what is the difference between the following commands? `rm -rf ./*` and `rm -rf /*`?
The first deletes everything under the current directory. The second tries to delete everything
under the root directory. I have made this mistake ... luckily it was on a VM and not my
actual machine, but unluckily most of two weeks of work was not backed up in github...
Always double check your `rm` command.

To make a directory, you can use the `mkdir` command.

To search in a file, you can use the `grep` command to match _regular expressions_, which are
patterns. We'll just use a simple `grep` for a word in the current directory. It will print out
every line of every file that contains the desired string of characters (even if its just part of
a word). To search every file in a directory, we can use `grep WORD ./*` where we have used
the wildcard `*`.

A common use case is not to use grep on a file, but to _pipe_ the output of another 
programming into grep to parse just the relevant information. For example, to see
which python packages are installed in our current environment we can use `pip freeze`.
But there's a lot! Suppose we just care about the version of `pandas`. Then we can
write `pip freeze | grep pandas`. The `|` is the pipe which connects the two commands. 
You should take a moment to appreciate how powerful this chaining of commands without
intervening variables can be. Is it immediately apparent how to pipe seemingly unrelated
commands together in python, for example?

#### Who are we and what are we allowed to do?

To see who are you connected as, you can use the `whoami` command while you can see all users
that are logged in with the `users` command. To see what machine you 
are on, you can use `hostname`.

Earlier when we ran `ls -lh` we could see that my name was repeated twice in front of
the file sizes. This referred to the owner of the file and the group owner of the file.
To see what groups you belong to, run `groups`. You would see that I, `kevin` belong to the `kevin` group
among many others.

The beginning of that command tells us what that file can be used to do. I won't go
over the structure of that string other than to say that `r` is read, `w` is write, 
and `x` is execute. Where these are present tells you whether the permissions are
at the owner, group, or global levels.

The commands to change the owner of a file is `chown` and the command to modify
permissions is `chmod`, that is the command to change the permissible modes of
the file. You might write a python script that you want to execute
directly and you'll need to add the
execute permission to it with `chmod +x script.py` so that you can run it 
by simply running `script.py` instead of `python script.py`. Permissions such as this
can be tracked by git. The `chmod` command also adds permission to each level, user;
group; and all; individually with a number system that is worth 
[looking up](https://www.december.com/unix/ref/chmod.html).

The most powerful user on a unix-like machine is the _root_ user. This user has permissions
to edit permissions and thus edit and execute any file on the system (roughly). You 
probably do not have root-level permissions natively, but since you are on your
personal machine, you can run probably run commands as if you were the root user (roughly). 
To do this...
you prepend `sudo` to any command. This stands for "superuser do". You can also use `sudo -s`
to become the root user in a shell.
For example, if I don't have permission to view
a directory called `/some/protected/directory` I could still change into this directory
by running `sudo -s` and then running `cd /some/protected/directory`. Depending on your settings, you
might be prompted for your password. Note that when I ran the `groups` command, 
I was part of the `sudo` group, a/k/a I am a _sudoer_. 

RUNNING SUDO COMMANDS IS DANGEROUS!! You can easily, say, delete the majority of your
file system if you run something dumb. Try to avoid `sudo` as much as you can.

#### What is happening on my computer?

You can run `top` to get some stats about what is happening on your machine. Hitting `m` while
`top` is running will switch from CPU to memory usage. (This might be system
dependent.)

To see what processes are running, you can use `ps`. This will only show what is
associated to you, to get a more comprehensive view you can use `ps ax` instead.

Many of the behaviors of your computer are controlled by _environment variables_. You can print
the current environment variables by running `printenv` It spits out a lot, so you might 
want to restrict what you see by piping to `grep` as we did above.
To set an environment variable, you can use `export VAR=value`. Note that the variables
are uppercase.

#### Can I leave my computer?

Potentially. One thing that is useful about using the terminal, is that it is very
low level and present on every machine. You might have access to a virtual machine
somewhere else. You might be able to connect with a graphical interface, but its
very commont to `ssh` into the machine. For example, I have a virtual machine setup
in Microsoft azure and I can connect with it via `ssh kevin@<ip address>` and
I can interact with it via its terminal to which I have connected. I don't have
a graphical connection, this is how I interact with it.

#### Hello, world?

We never did the hello world thing, so are we even using a new 
programming language yet? To print to standard out, you can `echo Hello, world!`.
A thing you might do is `echo *.pyc >> .gitignore` to append this line into your
`.gitignore` file.


#### What are these commands?

As stated earlier, we are interacting with the terminal using
the shell bash `bash`. But what if we want to use `sh` instead? 
You can enter into `sh`
by typing it into your terminal and still run many commands. One command you might
find useful if you have just done this is `exit` which will return you from whence
you came back into a `bash` based prompt.

One of the design philosophies behind these tools is that none of these base
commands should be complicated, and they should work well. Anything that
requires complex manipulation, for a very conservative definition of "complex", 
should be done in a script and designed as needed. Do you need to move a file and
change its permissions based on the permissions of the directory you are moving it
into? That's two commands, not just one.

There are other options, `fish` is actually what I mostly use. It's not common because
it is not POSIX compatible -- i.e., it does not conform to the most common standard
for shells. The second most common POSIX compatible shell is `zsh`, which you might
want to explore. I would recommend sticking with `bash` or `zsh` or another
POSIX compatible shell until you are comfortable, as almost all unix-like 
systems will have `bash` installed.

To learn more about a particular command, you can typically append `--help` to the
command to learn more. Some commands have a user manual that can be accesseed by
prepending `man` to the command.manual pages (manpages).


#### But can I make it pretty?

Many programs have config files such as ssh, and mostly these are hidden files in your home directory.
In linux systems you can edit the `.bashrc` file to change how the bash program sets itself
up and presents itself. On Mac OS you might need to edit `.bash_profile` instead.
Note that I have different colors for my name and the file
directory -- These visual cues are important when you are switching between profiles and
ssh'ing into other computers. I also have it displaying which conda env is
active and information about the state of the current git repository if I'm in one.
A common thing to do is set various environment variables using the `export` command.

# Text editing

## Traditional Editors

Okay, but we haven't acutally edited any files other than deleting them or creating directories.
How do you edit from the command line?

Before we do that, how do we create an empty file? As with the creation of Adam on the ceiling of the
Sistine chapel... we `touch file.txt` to create the file `file.txt`.

And now we enter into holy war territory... what is the best text editor to use from the command line to
edit a file?

Let's start with the inoffensive option that no one uses: `nano`. This is an editor that most unix-like
operating systems will come with. It is extremely lightweight, but you can write to a file,
do some simple searching, and save the file.

The two options for which you'll find many partisans are vi (actually vim, these days) and emacs.
I use vim, mostly because I got confused by emacs when I first started programming and refused to
use a command line text editor. When I came around, my bad experience led me to use vim. Is vim
any easier or better? I honestly don't know. But I do know that vim, or at least vi, is part of the
POSIX standard while emacs is not, so vim is present on pretty much every unix-like machine you
might find yourself on. In practice, emacs migh also be.

To open a file using vim, you just use `vi file.txt`. Typically `vi` and `vim` point to the same
place. To see this, you can run `which vi` and `which vim` to see where they point then
run `ls -lh` on the files you see as the result of those commands to see where these files
actually point. Do this repeatedly, and you'll usually see that you end up calling the same
executable for both commands.

vi is a mode-based editor. So at first you can just move around with the arrow keys. To start
editing inline, hit `i` and start typing away. Hit escape to go back to normal mode. To
save the file hit `:w` and to exit hit `:q`. These commands can be combined as `:x`.
There are commands to search and replace, e.g., `:% s/word/new word/g`, which looks very
complicated but you can get the hang of it.

My recommendation is to get familiar with vi. It's somewhat unnatural at first, but you'll find
that, as with the command line, it can become much faster than a GUI based editor. If you
find yourself having to connect to virtual machines, you'll always have it at your fingertips.
It's also lightweight, has a homegrown packaging system, and the ability to perform
syntax highlighting, linting, and can edit many files at once without crashing. Emacs is also a
fine choice and there's a good chance its pre-installed on whatever machine you are working on.

## Integreated Development Environments

However, modern integrated development environments can probably offer you much more out
of the box -- including the ability to edit files using `vi`-like commands. A few of the common
ones are VS Code (released by Microsoft, what I'm most familiar with), Atom (used by others on
my team), Sublime, and, specifically for python, PyCharm. Using VS Code, for example since I'm
most familiar with it, you can in one tab have an open connection to your database and be
running SQL queries while in another tab you edit a python script, and in another tab you
have a running Jupyter notebook, and below all of the tabs you can have an open terminal,
all in one window without having to switch programs. All this while preserving what might be
the more familiar point and click mentality.

## Writing a script

If you want to write a script, the top of the script has to have a _shebang_ that tells your
command line interpreter how to run the file. For example, a bash script might start with
`#!/bin/bash` and a python script might start with `#!/usr/bin/env python`. This,
in addition to making the file executable with `chmod +x` allows you to create your own scripts.

# Homework

- Change the colors / format of your prompt by editing your bash settings in your .bashrc or .bash_profile file
- Write a bash script that deletes both the local and remote -- assumed to be at origin -- git branch of a given name. Remember to to make the file executable! [hint](https://linuxize.com/post/bash-shebang/)
- Append a random directory to your PATH environment variable and execute code from that directory from another directory
- SSH into the virtual machine I have set up by running `ssh erdostest@<ip address>` and connect using the password I told you.
- Generate a new public and private key using RSA encryption with 4096 bits. Send the PUBLIC key to me and I'll add it to the VM. Use this to SSH into the VM without needing a password.
- Learn how to use `awk` to get some basic stats from a csv.
- Read about the purpose of common unix directories such as /etc, /var, /bin, /lib, /opt
